[Music]
three Bureau of Investigation created on
his own administrative authority in 1908
by Attorney General Charles J Bonaparte
in the face of congressional opposition
for reasons of statutory obligations and
practical need the Bureau of
Investigation had virtually no
intelligence mission until European
hostilities in the summer of 1914
precipitated a necessity for federal
detection and pursuance of alleged
violations of the neutrality laws enemy
activities disloyalty cases the
naturalization of enemy aliens the
enforcement of the Conscription
espionage and Sedition laws and
surveillance of radicals these duties
evolved as the United States moved from
neutrality to a state of declared war
and then in the aftermath of peace found
its domestic tranquility and security
threatened by new ideologies and their
practitioners the bureau's principal
function during the war years was that
of Investigation during this period
agents had no direct statutory
authorization to carry weapons or to
make general arrests in the field they
worked with and gathered information for
the United States Attorney's direction
came from the Attorney General or the
bureau chief in the frenzy of the
wartime spy mania Washington often lost
its control over field operations so
that agents and US Attorney's assisted
by cadres of volunteers from the
American Protective League and other
similar patriotic auxiliaries pursued
suspects of disloyalty on their own
initiative and in their own manner to
the extent that their investigative
findings underwent analysis with a view
toward policy development an
intelligence function was served but for
the most part this type of contribution
appears to have been lost in the
emotionalism and gsella tree of the
moment Bureau of Investigation
leadership 1908 through 25 attorneys
General Charles J Bonaparte 1906 through
o9 george w wickersham 1909 through 13
James
see McReynolds 19 13 through 14
Thomas W Gregory 1914 through 19 a
mitchell Palmer 19 19 through 21 Harry m
Daugherty 19 21 through 24 and Harland F
stone 1924 through 25 bureau chiefs
Stanley W Finch 1908 through 12 a Bruce
velasca 19 12 through 19 William II
Allen 1919 William J Flynn 19 19 through
21 William J Burns 19 21 through 24 and
J Edgar Hoover starting in 1924 in 1915
the first full year of the war the
bureau in the words of one sympathetic
chronicler of its development and
activities consisted of a quote small
and inept force of 219 agents and quote
which quote was totally unequipped to
deal with the clever espionage and
sabotage ring of world war 1 which was
organized by german ambassador
johann von Bernstorff footnote don
whitehead the FBI story New York Pocket
Books 1958 first published 1956 page 14
and footnote 2 years later when America
entered the hostilities the bureau's
agent force was increased from 300 to
400 quote a puny squad for policing more
than 1 million enemy aliens protecting
harbors and war industry zones barred to
enemy aliens aiding draft boards and the
army and locating draft dodgers and
deserters and carrying on the regular
duties of investigating federal law
violators and quote this state of
affairs was one of the reasons the
Justice Department welcomed the
assistance of the American Protective
League in many of its initial wartime
activities the bureau was still
searching for a mission quote early in
1917 the bureau proclaimed that it was
in charge of spy catching and the
department's representative called it
the eyes and ears of the government
however the Army and Navy were the Armed
Forces endangered or advanced on the
European battlefields by espionage
operations and their own detectives
necessarily had primary control of
stopping the movements of enemy spies
and of war materials and information
useful to the enemy everywhere in the
world including the homefront the
military authorities associated with
their own agents the operatives of the
State Department traditionally charged
with responsibility for Foreign Affairs
the military departments seemed
primarily to want the help of the
specialized forces of the Treasury the
war trade board and the Labor Department
for cutting off the flow of enemy spies
goods and information those of the
agriculture and interior departments for
safeguarding production of food and raw
materials and the local police
departments throughout America as well
as the Treasury detectives for
protecting American war plants
waterfront installations and essential
war shipping against sabotage and
carelessness this attitude brought the
Treasury Police to the forefront the
Treasury's agents possessed not only
vast equipment immediately convertible
to wartime espionage in behalf of the
United States but also the necessary
experience they possessed the specific
techniques that enabled them to find
enemy agents and ship's crews among
passengers or stowed away to pick them
up at any port in the world where they
might embark or drop off the sides of
ships to foil their mid-ocean signals to
German submarines
moreover the Treasury's men knew how to
discover in the immense quantities of
shipments to our allies and to our
neutrals the minut but vital goods
addressed to neutral lands actually
destined to reach the enemy Treasury
operatives had the right training for
uncovering the secret information
transmitted to the enemy in every medium
and ships manifests and mail and
passengers and crews papers and
phonograph records and photographic
negatives and in motion picture film
they had the experience for the job of
protecting the loaded vessels in the
harbours the warehouses and the entire
water
front the Justice Department police were
invited to participate in various
advisory boards but when invited by the
post office detectives old hands at
inspection of enemy mail to sit on an
advisory board the Justice police spoke
with self deprecation
perhaps after all there was no use in
littering up the board with one of their
men and quote footnote max Lowenthal the
Federal Bureau of Investigation New York
William Sloan associates nineteen fifty
pages 22 through 23 this highly critical
account of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation contains the only detailed
discussion of early operations of the
agency in footnote what did evolve as a
major wartime Bureau function and one
having intelligence implications in
light of espionage and Sedition law was
the investigation and cataloguing of the
political opinions beliefs and
affiliations of the citizenry this
Bureau activity also had a menacing
aspect to it in terms of guaranteed
rights of speech and Association also it
did not come to public notice until
after the Armistice quote the disclosure
came as an indirect consequence of a
political quarrel between ex-congressman
a mitchell Palmer a pennsylvania lawyer
and corporation director who became
alien property custodian and was soon to
become Attorney General of the United
States and a United States Senator Boies
Penrose of Pennsylvania mr. Palmer had
accused the senator of receiving
political support from the Brewers and
of being a tool for their anti
prohibition propaganda the attack was
made while the war was still going on
and mr. Palmer added the charge that the
American Brewers were Pro German and
unpatriotic the dry element in the
United States Senate
promptly seized on the publicity thus
provided and pushed through a resolution
to investigate both charges political
propaganda and Pro German ISM in the
course of the hearings dealing with pro
German ISM the investigating committee
turned to a Bruce velasca wartime
chief of the Bureau of Investigation and
others connected with the bureau they
revealed the fact that the bureau had
already been cataloging all kinds of
persons they suspected of being
pro-german they had found suspects in
all walks of American life among those
of whose pro-german ISM the public thus
learned were members of the United
States Senate other important officials
eg William Jennings Bryan president
Wilson's first Secretary of State and
Judge John F Hyland soon to become mayor
of New York City and many persons and
organizations not connected with the
government
eg William Randolph Hearst his
international news service and various
newspapers his New York American and the
Chicago Tribune Americans agitating for
Irish independence including editors of
the American Catholic weekly and the
Freeman's Journal some of the foremost
men and academic life political leaders
such as Roger Sullivan of Chicago and
men of prominence in the financial and
business world and quote during the
course of the congressional
investigation
the bureau's offerings were found to
abound with factual inaccuracies and to
have resulted in wrong conclusions even
when the facts were correct the occasion
did not instill much public confidence
in the bureau's intelligence activities
or product when confronted with a series
of bombings directed against public
officials during late 1918 and 1919 the
bureau's analytical skills again
appeared to be deficient quote as in the
case of the 1918 bombing the Justice
Department detectives made a prompt
announcement of who the criminals in the
1919 cases were the bombing jobs they
said were the work of radicals whose
purpose was the assassination of federal
officials and the overthrow of the
government to support this deduction
they pointed out that some of the bombs
arrived at their destination shortly
before the 1st of May 1919 and others
shortly after that time and that May Day
is the date
traditionally chosen by some radicals to
celebrate their doctrines by parading
however an
other series of bombs was sent in June
posing the question how the detectives
could attribute these new bomb attempts
to made a radicalism the theory that the
bombs were sent by radicals was beset
with further embarrassments the
government officials to whom the bombs
were addressed included some men who
were hostile to radicalism but prominent
public men whom the Bureau of
Investigation suspected of being
themselves radicals and unsympathetic
with the program against the radicals
were included among the addressees
indeed some of the men were targets of
denunciation from Capitol Hill as
dangerous radicals critics who disagreed
with the detectives conclusion asked why
radicals with bombs should select as
victims the very men who might be their
friends why in particular should they
seek to bomb ex-senator Hardwick of
Georgia who had asked the Senate to vote
against the very wartime Sedition law
under which the IWW International
Workers of the world leaders and other
radicals had been convicted a further
difficulty arose out of the fact that
some of the bombs were sent to minor
businessmen and to relatively minor
local office holders while most of the
top government officials whose death
would have been of particular importance
to revolutionaries were not included
among the potential victims selected by
the Bombers and quote radicalism
captured the attention of the bureau in
the aftermath of the world war
preoccupation with the ideology its
leadership and organizations became so
great that on August 1st 1919 a general
intelligence division was established
within the bureau to devote concentrated
scrutiny to the subject quote there was
however a difficulty with respect to the
expenditure of the money appropriated
for the bureau's use by Congress it
specified that the Appropriations were
for the detection and prosecution of
crimes a provision for the detection of
seditious speech and writings however
might someday be passed and the
detectives concluded that preparation
would be useful in the form of an
advanced job to ascertain which
dividuals and organizations held beliefs
that were objectionable with this
information in hand it could go into
action without delay after Congress
passed a peacetime Sedition law similar
to the wartime Sedition laws enacted in
1917 and 1918 the bureau notified its
agents on August 12th 1919 eleven days
after the creation of the anti radical
division to engage in the broadest
detection of sedition and to secure
evidence which may be of use in
prosecutions under legislation which may
hereafter be enacted end quote
the new Intelligence Unit thus appears
to have been created and financed in
anticipation of a valid statutory
purpose and seems as well to have
engaged in investigations wherein the
derivative information was not gathered
in pursuit of federal prosecutions quote
coincident with the creation of the new
division the bureau selected J Edgar
Hoover as division chief he had joined
the Department of Justice two years
earlier
shortly after America entered the war
and shortly before Congress enacted the
wartime Sedition law he had been on duty
at the Justice Department during the
entire war period and obviously he was
in a position to obtain a view of the
detective activities against persons
prosecuted or under surveillance for
their statements he had also been in a
position to note the preeminence of the
military detective services during the
war and the connotations of success
attached to their names military and
naval intelligence services besides the
new unit at the Department of Justice
was in the business of detecting ideas
he called it an intelligence force in
substitution for the names with which it
started radical division and anti
radical division mr. Hoover avoided one
action of the war and navy intelligence
agencies their scope had been narrowed
by the qualifying prefixes in their
titles he named his force the general
intelligence division gid end quote
in 1920 when one third of the detective
staff at bureau headquarters in
washington had been assigned to
anti-radical matters and over one-half
of the bureau's field work had been
diverted to the subject of radicalism
gid reported that quote the work of the
general intelligence division has now
expanded to cover more general
intelligence work including not only
ultra radical activities but also to the
study of matters of an international
nature as well as economic and
industrial disturbances incident thereto
end quote and as its mission developed
so too did the G I DS manner of
operation and techniques of inquiry
quote the bureau of investigation faced
and solved one problem in the first 10
days of the existence of mr. Hoover's
division the problem of the kind of data
the detectives should send to
headquarters they were going to receive
material from undercover informers from
neighbors from personal enemies of the
persons under investigation
the detectives were going to hear gossip
about what people were said to have said
or were suspected of having done
information derived in some instances
from some unknown person who had told
the bureau's agents or informers or the
latter's inform us some of the
information received might relate to
people's personal habits and life
the bureau's decision was that
everything received by the special
agents and informers should be reported
to headquarters the agents were
specifically directed to send whatever
reached them of every nature but they
were warned that not everything that
they gathered could be used in trials
where men were accused of radicalism
some items about personal lives however
interesting to the detectives might not
be regarded as relevant in court
proceedings against alleged radicals
furthermore despite the fact that the
bureau instructed its agents to transmit
to headquarters everything that they
picked up whether hearsay or otherwise
it warned them that there was a
difference between the sources from
which the gid was willing to receive
accusations and statements for its
permanent dossiers and the evidence
which trial judges and tribunals would
accept as
reliable proof in judicial proceedings
the Bureau of Investigation informed all
its agents there was an insistence on
what is called technical proof and
judges would rule that the rumors and
gossip which the detectives were
instructed to supply to GID had no value
end quote
in order to assess the program and
thinking of the radicals it was
necessary to study the literature and
writing of the ideologues gathering such
printed material became a major GID
project and acquisitions were made on a
mass basis quote detectives were sent to
local radical publishing houses and to
take their books in addition they were
to find every private collection or
library in the possession of any radical
and to make the arrangements for
obtaining them in their entirety thus
when the GID discovered an obscure
Italian born philosopher who had a
unique collection of books on the theory
of anarchism his lodgings were raided by
the bureau and his valuable collection
became one more involuntary contribution
to the huge and ever-growing library of
the gid similar contributions came from
others among them the anarchist
philosophers who had retired to farms or
elsewhere a number of them had over the
years built up private libraries in
pursuit of their studies these are
discovered by the general intelligence
division and it was soon able to report
that three of the most complete
libraries on anarchy were seized the
bureau took over the contents of a
school library which it discovered in a
rural community of radicals it also
obtained the library of a boys club and
assured Congress that the library was in
possession of this department catalogs
of these acquisitions were prepared
including a catalogue of the greatest
library in the country which contains
anarchistic books in the search for
literature the bureau sent many of its
men to join radical organizations to
attend radical meetings and to bring
back whatever they could lay their hands
on the book seekers and the raiding
detectives too
to off by them were directed to find the
places where specially valuable books
pamphlets and documents might be guarded
against possible burglary they were to
ransack desks to tap ceilings and walls
carpets and mattresses had to be ripped
up and safes opened everything hanging
on the walls should be gathered up so
the official instructions to the
detectives read end quote in an attempt
to improve upon the wartime surveillance
records of the bureau and to enhance the
GID information store Hoover created a
card file system containing a census of
every person and group believed by his
detectives to hold dangerous ideas quote
the index also had separate cards for
publications and for special conditions
a phrase the meaning of which has never
been made clear in addition mr. Hoover's
index separately assembled all radical
matters pertaining to each city in which
there were radicals each card recorded
full details about its subject material
regarded by the detectives as revealing
each man's seditious ideas and data
needed to enable the government's
espionage service to find him quickly
when he was wanted for shadowing or for
arrest the Intelligence Division
reported that its task was complicated
by reason of the fact that one of the
main characteristics of the radicals in
the United States is found in their
migratory nature the GID assured
Congress that mr. Hoover had a group of
experts especially trained for the
purpose this training program was
directed to making them well informed
upon the general movements in the
territory over which they have
supervision they were also trained to
manage and develop the intricate index
and they had to keep up with its
fabulous growth the first disclosure by
the GID showed 100,000 radicals on the
index the next a few months later
200,000 the third a year later 450,000
within the first 2 and 1/2 years of
indexing the general intelligence
division had approximately half a
million persons cataloged inventory
and secretly recorded in government
records as dangerous men and women a
considerably older unit of the
Department of Justice its Bureau of
Criminal identification had long
maintained an index of actual criminals
in 1923 after several years of trying
the Bureau of Investigation took over
the older Bureau and the 750,000 name
index it had developed in the course of
a quarter of a century whether the two
indices were merged or kept separate has
not been announced hence when mr. Hoover
stated in 1926 that his bureau's index
contained one and a half million names
it is not clear whether this was the
total for both indices or for one only
and quote also in addition to indexing
radicals gid prepared biographical
profiles of certain of them deemed to be
of special importance quote the writing
up of lives and careers proceeded
rapidly so that within three and 1/2
months of the G IDS existence its
biographical writers had written a more
or less complete history of over 60,000
radically inclined individuals according
to the official information supplied the
Senate included were biographies of
persons showing any connection with an
ultra radical body or movement in
particular authors publishers editors
etc rigorous secrecy has been imposed on
the list of names of newspaper men
authors printers editors and publishers
who were made the subjects of G IDS
biographical section how many additional
biographies have been written since the
middle of November 1919 who were the G
IDs first or later biographers how they
were trained so promptly and how they
managed to write 60,000 biographies in
100 days these questions have never been
answered end quote
beside
all of this activity the general
intelligence division prepared and
circulated a special weekly intelligence
report quote for this purpose the
division first
engaged in the collection examination
and assimilation of all information
received from the field force or from
other sources on the basis of such
preparation it drafted a report every
week on the state of radicalism in
America that week only top echelon
people in the government of the United
States were allowed to see these secret
reports their names could not be
disclosed nor could the gid described
them to Congress any more revealingly
than to say that they were such
officials as by the nature of their
duties are entitled to the information
every copy that left the closely guarded
Washington headquarters of gid left only
under proper protection Congress was
informed that the weekly GID bulletins
covered three classes of facts first the
entire field of national and
international operations second the
latest authoritative statements or
definitions of tactics programs
principles or platforms of organizations
or movements and third a bird's-eye view
of all situations at home or abroad
which will keep the officials properly
informed end quote such were the Bureau
of Investigations efforts at
intelligence operations and the
generation of an intelligence product
during World War one and the years
immediately following as a consequence
of both presidential and public
displeasure with attorney General Harry
m Daugherty new leadership came to the
Justice Department in 1924 Harlan F
stone became Attorney General and J
Edgar Hoover assumed the leadership of
the Bureau of Investigation official
concern with radicals diminished when a
more conscientious effort at a
responsible law enforcement was made by
stone and his attempt to instill public
confidence in the agency which Doherty
had sullied and which had to deal with
the bold advances of organized crime and
the gangsterism brought on by national
prohibition
[Music]
this is our hidden history
Oh